feat(mnq): migration doc (#2201)
scaleway/docs-content: serverless/messaging/reference-content/migration.mdx

---
meta:

>   title: Understanding Messaging and Queuing GA and Migration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  title: Understanding Messaging and Queuing GA and migration
```

  description: Learn about the new version of Messaging and Queuing being released for when SQS and NATS go into General Availability, and how migration to the new version will work.
content:

>   h1: Understanding Messaging and Queuing GA and Migration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  h1: Understanding Messaging and Queuing GA and migration
```

  paragraph: Learn about the new version of Messaging and Queuing being released for when SQS and NATS go into General Availability, and how migration to the new version will work.
tags: messaging queuing sqs sns nats beta ga general-availability migration api v1 v2 namespace no-namespace
dates:
  validation: 2023-09-25
  posted: 2023-09-25
categories:
  - serverless
---

## Overview

> Soon, a new version of Messaging and Queuing will be released. In this version, the concept of **namespaces** will be removed, to streamline your workflows, offer you a better developer experience, and simplify your management of your Messaging and Queuing resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Soon, a new version of Messaging and Queuing will be released. In this version, the concept of **namespaces** will be removed, to streamline your workflows, offer you a better developer experience, and simplify the management of your Messaging and Queuing resources.
```

> The release of this new version in the Scaleway console will coincide with the [NATS](/serverless/messaging/concepts/#nats) and [SQS](/serverless/messaging/concepts/#sqs) protocols leaving [Public Beta](https://www.scaleway.com/en/betas/) and going into General Availability (GA) This means that the Messaging and Queuing product, when used with these protocols, will become billable. [SNS](/serverless/messaging/concepts/#sns) will remain in Public Beta for now while we continue testing and improving the product.

Reviewer 2: console > Console ?

> The release of this new version in the Scaleway console will coincide with the [NATS](/serverless/messaging/concepts/#nats) and [SQS](/serverless/messaging/concepts/#sqs) protocols leaving [Public Beta](https://www.scaleway.com/en/betas/) and going into General Availability (GA) This means that the Messaging and Queuing product, when used with these protocols, will become billable. [SNS](/serverless/messaging/concepts/#sns) will remain in Public Beta for now while we continue testing and improving the product.

Reviewer 2: _improving the product_ while you are still using it
Proposition :  Just to remind them that it's working and good to use, not abandoned in any ways

> Your NATS resources will automatically be migrated to the new version of the product. However, for SQS and SNS you will need to migrate, by recreating your resources in the new version. You can do this via the API or the console. This is very important, as 30 days after the new version is released, the old version of the product will be decommissioned and all resources still existing within it will be deleted.

Reviewer 2: This is very important, as 30 days after the new version is released, the old version of the product will be decommissioned and all resources still existing within it will be deleted.
 
I feel as it's missing a "." somewhere no ?

> Your NATS resources will automatically be migrated to the new version of the product. However, for SQS and SNS you will need to migrate, by recreating your resources in the new version. You can do this via the API or the console. It is very important that you migrate, because 30 days after the new version is released, the old version of the product will be decommissioned. All resources still existing within the old version will be deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your NATS resources will automatically be migrated to the new version of the product. However, for SQS and SNS you will need to migrate, by recreating your resources in the new version. You can do this via the API or the console. Migrating to the new version is very important, as 30 days after the release of the new version, the old product version will be retired, resulting in the removal of all resources still present in the old version.
```

> For all protocols, the endpoints of your brokers will change and you will need to update these endpoints in any code, applications or architectures using your message brokers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For all protocols, the endpoints of your brokers will change, and you will need to update these endpoints in any code, applications or architectures using your message brokers.
```

Read on to find out more about the new no-namespace version of the product, and how migration will work for the protocols you use.

## The current situation: v1alpha1 and namespaces

Whether you create and manage your NATS, or SQS/SNS namespaces and credentials via our [API](https://www.scaleway.com/en/developers/api/messaging-and-queuing/) and [console](https://console.scaleway.com/), they both point towards the same underlying version of the product: `v1alpha1`, which holds your resources.

> In this version of the product, you create one or multiple **namespaces**, setting the **protocol** for each namespace as either **NATS** or **SQS/SNS**. Each namespace gives you a **URL** (or endpoint) representing a Messaging and Queuing broker, and also allows you to create **credentials** to access that particular namespace. When you create messages, queues, streams, topics and other resources, they are scoped to that namespace.

Reviewer 2: Normally multiple namespace creation has been deprecated "in the dark silent of the night" so they cannot do that.
Maybe we can just say "you create namespaces" ?

## What's going to change: v1beta1 and no more namespaces

Soon, `v1alpha1` will be deprecated, and `v1beta1` will go into production, representing the new and improved Messaging and Queuing product.

In this new version of the product, the concept of namespaces has been removed:

- For **NATS** namespaces have been replaced by **accounts**. You can create one or multiple NATS accounts, and credentials for each account. Each account will have its own URL/endpoint.
- **SQS** and **SNS** have been separated into two distinct protocols. Instead of creating a namespace, you simply **activate** each protocol. You can then create credentials for each protocol. If you previously used multiple SQS or SNS namespaces to separate resources, you should now use [Scaleway Projects](/console/my-project/concepts/#project) to separate your resources.

## From Public Beta to General Availability: impact on billing

> The change to the new "no-namespace" version of Messaging and Queuing will also coincidence with the NATS and SQS protocols moving into General Availability. This means that the beta testing phase is over, and you will now be billed for your use of Messaging and Queuing with NATS and SQS protocols. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The change to the new "no-namespace" version of Messaging and Queuing will also coincide with the NATS and SQS protocols moving into General Availability. This means that the beta testing phase is over, and you will now be billed for your use of Messaging and Queuing with NATS and SQS protocols. 
```

Billing will be based on:

- For **NATS**: **Stream volume** (the number of messages sent * the message size) and **stream persistence** (the total amount of data stored * duration)
- For **SQS**: **Queue volume** (the number of messages sent * the message size)

Full details of price points and how the billing model works will be available at the time of General Availability.

<Message type="important">
The precise start of the billing period for NATS and SQS is defined as the time of General Availability, **not** as the time of the migration to the new `v1beta1` "no-namespace" version of the product. Check out our [Slack channel](https://slack.scaleway.com/) #messaging-queuing-beta to stay up to date. The announcement of General Availability will also be visible in the Scaleway console.

> </Message>

Reviewer 2: Should we be more explicit by saying that old API resources will be billed?

Note that **SNS** will not yet move into General Availability, but will instead stay in Public Beta while we continue to work on testing and improving this product. This means that you will not yet be billed for using Messaging and Queuing with the SNS protocol, even though the `v1beta1` version will also be used for SNS.

## Migration: timescales and action to take

> Below we explain for each protocol how the migration from the old to the new Messaging and Queuing will work, and what action you will need to take.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below, we explain for each protocol how the migration from the old to the new Messaging and Queuing will work, and what action you will need to take.
```

### NATS

> Scaleway will automatically migrate each of your NATS namespaces and its credentials from the old version of Messaging and Queuing to the new one. In the new version, each namespace will effectively be a NATS account (each with its corresponding credentials). 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Scaleway will automatically migrate each of your NATS namespaces and their credentials from the old version of Messaging and Queuing to the new one. In the new version, each namespace will effectively be a NATS account (each with its corresponding credentials). 
```

The migration should be seamless: if you log into the Scaleway console before migration/GA you will see the "old" version of Messaging and Queuing with your existing resources showing as namespaces. After migration/GA, you will see the "new" version with your newly migrated resources now showing as accounts.

In terms of the API, the [current `v1alpha1`](https://www.scaleway.com/en/developers/api/messaging-and-queuing/) version will continue to be available 30 days after migration/General Availability, co-existing with the new `v1beta1` version. The documentation for both will be accessible via the [Scaleway Developers website](https://www.scaleway.com/en/developers/api) via a dropdown at the top of the Messaging and Queuing API page. 

> Internally, NATS namespaces (and their credentials) and NATS accounts (and their credentials) are the same resources, visible through both APIs. During the migration period, both APIs' endpoints are essentially accessing the same resources. Do not attempt to delete your NATS resources from the `v1alpha1` API as this will also delete them from the new `v1beta1` API and console. You will not be billed "twice" for resources in the old and new API, because these are essentially the same resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Internally, NATS namespaces (and their credentials) and NATS accounts (and their credentials) are the same resources, visible through both APIs. During the migration period, both APIs' endpoints are essentially accessing the same resources. Do not attempt to delete your NATS resources from the `v1alpha1` API, as this will also delete them from the new `v1beta1` API and console. You will not be billed "twice" for resources in the old and new API because these are essentially the same resources.
```

Note that **the URL/endpoint by which you access your NATS resources will not be the same in the two versions**. By the end of the migration period, you **must** update any code, scripts, applications and architectures using the old endpoint, to update to the new endpoint. After this time, the old endpoints will no longer be recognized.

The new URL/endpoint will be visible in the console after General Availability, and also from the new API.

**Summary: NATS**

✅ Migration from the old to new API will be automatically performed for you <br />
✅ Billing of NATS resources will begin at the time of General Availability <br />
✅ You must update your code, applications and architectures so they use the new endpoint no later than 30 days after General Availability

### SQS

> From the time of Messaging and Queuing with SQS going into General Availability, you will have 30 days in which to migrate your SQS resources from the old version to the new version. You must migrate your resources yourself: this will not be automatic like it will for NATS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From the moment Messaging and Queuing with SQS goes into General Availability, you will have 30 days to migrate your SQS resources from the old to the new version. You must migrate your resources yourself: this will not be automatic like it will for NATS.
```

Note the following important information about the migration/crossover period, when both versions of the API will exist:

**Before GA**
- Only the `v1alpha1` API is available. All your resources exist in this API.
- The console is based on this API, so when you view your resources in the console, you are viewing resources in the `v1alpha1` API.

**At the time of GA**
- The `v1alpha1` API is still available. Your resources continue to exist in this API until you delete them.
- The `v1beta1` API also becomes available. You should recreate your resources (credentials and queues) in this API.
- The console now uses the `v1beta1` API. **You will no longer be able to see or manage your old resources from the `v1alpha1` API via the console**. Any resources now created via the console exist in the `v1beta1` API.
- Messaging and Queuing with SQS is now billable. Whether you are using the old version or the new one, via the API or other devtools or the console, you are now billed for the messages you send.

**30 days after GA**
- The `v1alpha1` API is decommissioned. Any resources still existing on this API are deleted.

> **The URL/endpoints for your Messaging and Queuing SQS service and for your queues will not be the same in the two versions**. Make sure that when you recreate your resources with the new version, you remember to update the endpoint in any code, scripts, applications and architectures that were using  the old endpoint. If you do not do so, they will continue to access the "old" resources rather than the new ones you have created for the new version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**The URL/endpoints for your Messaging and Queuing SQS service and for your queues will not be the same in the two versions**. Make sure that when you recreate your resources with the new version, you remember to update the endpoint in any code, scripts, applications and architectures that were using the old endpoint. If you do not do so, they will continue to access the "old" resources rather than the new ones you have created for the new version.
```

The new URLs/endpoints will be visible in the console after General Availability, and also from the new API.

**Summary: SQS**

✅ You must migrate from the old version to the new by recreating your resources and credentials <br />
✅ You must update your code, applications and architectures so they use the endpoints of the new version once you migrate <br />
✅ Billing of SQS resources will begin at the time of General Availability, and apply to both the old and new versions <br />
✅ All resources still existing on the old version will be deleted 30 days after the beginning of General Availability <br />

### SNS

SNS with Messaging and Queuing is not going into General Availability the way that NATS and SQS are. However, it will still be moving from the existing old version (`v1alpha1`) to the new version (`v1beta1`) without namespaces. Therefore, even though you will not be billed for your SNS resources in the immediate future while it remains in Public Beta, there will still be a migration to carry out.

> At the time of the release of the new version (which will coincide with SQS and NATS going into General Availability) you will have 30 days in which to migrate your SNS resources from the old version to the new version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the time of the release of the new version (which will coincide with SQS and NATS going into General Availability) you will have 30 days to migrate your SNS resources from the old to the new version.
```

Note the following important information about the migration/crossover period, when both versions of the API will exist:

**Before release of new version**
- Only the `v1alpha1` API is available. All your resources exist in this API.
- The console is based on this API, so when you view your resources in the console, you are viewing resources in the `v1alpha1` API.

**At the time that SQS and NATS go into GA**
- The `v1alpha1` API is still available. Your resources continue to exist in this API until you delete them.
- The `v1beta1` API also becomes available. You should recreate your resources in this API.
- The console now uses the `v1beta1` API. **You will no longer be able to see or manage your old resources from the `v1alpha1` API via the console**. Any resources now created via the console exist in the `v1beta1` API.

**30 days afterwards**
- The `v1alpha1` API is decommissioned. Any resources still existing on this API are deleted.

> **The URL/endpoints for your Messaging and Queuing SNS service and for your topics will not be the same in the two versions**. Make sure that when you recreate your resources with the new version, you remember to update the endpoint in any code, scripts, applications and architectures that were using  the old endpoint. If you do not do so, they will continue to access the "old" resources rather than the new ones you have created for the new version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**The URL/endpoints for your Messaging and Queuing SNS service and for your topics will not be the same in the two versions**. Make sure that when you recreate your resources with the new version, you remember to update the endpoint in any code, scripts, applications and architectures that were using the old endpoint. If you do not do so, they will continue to access the "old" resources rather than the new ones you have created for the new version.
```

> **The URL/endpoints for your Messaging and Queuing SNS service and for your topics will not be the same in the two versions**. Make sure that when you recreate your resources with the new version, you remember to update the endpoint in any code, scripts, applications and architectures that were using  the old endpoint. If you do not do so, they will continue to access the "old" resources rather than the new ones you have created for the new version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**The URL/endpoints for your Messaging and Queuing SNS service and for your topics will not be the same in the two versions**. Make sure that when you recreate your resources with the new version, you remember to update the endpoint in any code, scripts, applications and architectures that were using the old endpoint. If you do not do so, they will continue to access the "old" resources rather than the new ones you have created for the new version.
```

The new URLs/endpoints will be visible in the console and also from the new API.

**Summary: SNS**

✅ You must migrate from the old version to the new by recreating your resources and credentials <br />
✅ You must update your code, applications and architectures so they use the endpoints of the new version once you migrate <br />
✅ SNS will remain in Public Beta (in both old and new versions) and will not yet be billed <br />
✅ All resources still existing on the old version will be deleted 30 days after the beginning of General Availability

## Terraform

There will be a new Terraform provider for the new version of Messaging and Queuing. The link will be published shortly.

> If you manage Messaging and Queuing using the old Terraform provider, you will need to recode your Terraform files to update to the new provider, in line with the migration timelines laid out above.

Reviewer 3: Is `recode` correct? (Just asking cause my grammar reviewer flagged this, and I couldn't find matching results on google; only `record` or `convert`).

Author: Hmm to me it sounds kind of OK like "code again" - I found a few google results but yes nothing in the dictionary. I'll look for an alternative.

Reviewer 3: @RoRoJ no need to replace it, then. I flagged it just in case. Thank you!
